*****************
Advanced Building
*****************

While CMaize strives to make building a project easy, power users and
developers will likely want more control over the project they are building.
This section highlights some advanced build system features.

Toolchains
==========

These files are forwarded to CMake via the ``CMAKE_TOOLCHAIN_FILE`` variable.
Particularly when you are setting a lot of options for CMake these files can
come in handy.  Basically they look like:

.. code-block:: cmake

   set(OPTION1 VALUE1)
   set(OPTION2 VALUE2)

That is they're just a large number of CMake ``set()`` commands. It is common
practice to assemble toolchain files per platform and share these files with
users to facilitate building.

Offline Builds
==============

Ultimately when CMaize can not locate a dependency it will retrieve that
dependency using CMake's ``FetchContent`` module. In turn, it is possible to
pre-download dependencies and build a CMaize project entirely offline. To do
this you will need to set ``FETCHCONTENT_FULLY_DISCONNECTED`` to ``TRUE`` and
tell CMake where to look for each dependency's source code. For a dependency
*foo*, set the variable ``FETCHCONTENT_SOURCE_DIR_FOO`` to the path to
*foo*'s source code.

Developing Across Multiple CMaize Projects
==========================================

Say you have two projects *A* and *B* such that *B* uses features in
*A*. It often is the case that you need to add a feature to *A* to use in
*B* (or correct a bug in *A* so that *B* works). In a traditional workflow
this would require modifying *A*, pushing the changes, and then rebuilding
*B* with those changes (possibly needing to muck with *B*'s
``CMakeLists.txt`` while the feature in *A* is in development still).
``FetchContent`` helps here too. Now you just set ``FETCHCONTENT_SOURCE_DIR_A``
to your local copy of *A* and rebuild *B*. CMake is smart enough to rebuild
*B*'s version of *A* if you further modify *A*.
